---
layout: post
title: "Hooks, hooks everywhere"
tagline: "Integrate git hooks in your project"
author: "Victor de Francisco"
---

Maybe sometime you have thought about the chance to make some tasks within your git actions. For example, check if some files have been modified in a commit, or maybe some crazy night you imagine that unit tests were executed before each push to the remote...

Well, those days were nearer than you think. We can use git hooks to automate such kind of things. In a few words, you can take action on every operation git performs during its work, that is, you can be a kind of `man in the middle` executing whatever you want in every phase of the git flow.

Please, in order to know about git hook internals, check out [What are Git hooks?][git-hooks-extended] or [Customizing Git - Git Hooks][git-hooks].


### Lets see some code

Git hides its magic in the `.git` folder. There you can find a `hooks` folder with a lot of `.sample` files, those are the git hooks, each of one is ready to be executed on a git stage that matches the filename.

```
root-of-project/
  .git/
    branches/
    config
    description
    HEAD
    hooks/
    	applypatch-msg.sample
    	commit-msg.sample
    	post-update.sample
    	pre-applypatch.sample
    	pre-commit.sample
    	prepare-commit-msg.sample
    	pre-push.sample
    	pre-rebase.sample
    	pre-receive.sample
    	update.sample
    index
    info/
    logs/
    objects/
    packed-refs
    refs/
```


Taking a look on each of those files you can have a first idea of how they work. They are all scripts that execute some kind of task.

>
> Git hook files are scripts, so hook environment 
> supports anything that your system knows how to execute
>


Recap, in order to execute custom tasks (check about changes in some files before commit or execute tests before push, for example), you should only have to implement in some script language those tasks, include them in the right hook file and should work.

Don't forget to remove the `.sample` extension of the used hook file, and see what happens (also be sure about execution permissions)

### Can we track our hook files on the git repository?

Everything seen before would work on your local machine, but what about to share those wonderful git hooks with the whole team? We can use git for that, for sure!

Wait, track in git files part of the git ecosystem? That will break the universe balance...doesn't it?

Well, it's true that those files can not be easily tracked by git because they are inside the `.git` folder, so they are hidden.

There are some solutions you can find on internet, creating a folder outside the `.git` folder, in the root of the project and save hook files there. Then those hooks should be copied to the original `hooks` folder inside `.git`. That could be used with a kind of `install` script inside the folder.

```
root-of-project/
  .git/
    hooks/
  our-hooks/
    pre-commit
    install.sh
```

We have implemented another solution in order to avoid copying each hook file, this is change the default hooks path inside the install script:

```
git config core.hooksPath our-hooks
```

That command will tell git where to find hook files, your custom hooks. We think that is a cleaner and easier solution as no copy is needed to use your hooks.

And that is, git will find your custom hooks in the path provided.

It's time to show you, if interested, one [hook][realm-hook] we have developed at [idealista][idealista] that checks if any file has changed in some path of the project (we need that to protect against [Realm][realm] forgotten migrations).


[git-hooks]: https://git-scm.com/book/gr/v2/Customizing-Git-Git-Hooks
[git-hooks-extended]: http://githooks.com
[realm-hook]: https://github.com/idealista/rhook
[idealista]: https://github.com/idealista
[realm]: https://realm.io